Chapter Two

All Things Change





In our dynamic universe, all things change, from the farthest reaches of outer space to the movement of continents. Change occurs in all living and nonliving systems. The history of civilization is the story of change from the simple to the more complex. Human ingenuity and invention bear witness to this fact. No system can remain static for long; most of the monarchies have been replaced by other forms of government and societies based on the will of the people, not kings, have evolved.
Unfortunately, the changes are not always for the best.

Although we accept the inevitability of change, humans meet it with a lot of resistance. In most cases, change threatens those in positions of advantage and for the most part they are there in the first place to keep things the way they are. This is true for any society, whether the power structure is religious, military, socialist, capitalist, communist, fascist, or tribal. The leaders will attempt to hold back change. Sometimes, even when conditions are terrible for the majority of people, the people themselves may resist change because there is comfort in the familiar. We refer to them as the un-appointed guardians of the system.
But no matter how much people resist, human civilization is no exception to the fact of change. Change occurs in all social systems, and is the only constant. We can be sure that the history of humankind is one of change.

Yet at every turn, vested interests (those who have the most to gain in keeping things the way they are) oppose even technological changes. For example, earlier in the twentieth century, defenders of the horse- mounted cavalry delayed development of the tank. So, entrenched was this tradition that when Germany invaded Poland in 1939, their tank division faced Polish soldiers still mounted on horseback.

It was obvious that the horse soldiers did not stand a chance. The development of aircraft threatened tank divisions. Then pilots and aircraft designers fought to hold back the development of guided missiles. The missile men fought to hold back the development of laser weapons. And so it goes.
 
If we wonder why we are still faced with many of the same problems our ancestors had when our technological capabilities so surpass theirs, we must consider that we have been here such a short time that we could almost be called “newborn.” If you were to use a twenty-four-hour clock to represent the time since life began on earth, it would show that humans have only been in existence since the last minute of the twenty-fourth hour. Only during the last few seconds of the last minute have modern humans begun to use scientific methods to find out the most effective ways of getting things done. We are just now beginning to hit our stride.
More new knowledge has been created from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present than in the previous billion years. Change is almost everywhere.

If life at times seems bewildering - if you feel pulled in many directions, if you find that no matter what you do, you still have sticky problems, if you find that our economic, political, and social ways of doing things sometimes create more difficulties than they solve - then you are simply playing your part in suffering through the present transitional phase of our civilization.
