Chapter Nine Cities in the Sea



The Ocean Frontiers

The web of life on our planet is supported by the hydro-cycle, that great variation of forms of water, which are part of the planetary circulation: the oceans, snow, ice, rain, lakes, groundwater, and aquifers. This constantly renewed circulation, powered by the heat of the sun, the rotation of the earth, and Coriolis forces, supports the entire life cycle, including humankind.

People often speak of underdeveloped land areas, but rarely of the greatest undeveloped natural resources on the planet, which are the world's oceans. Exploration and development of the oceans must be carried out with the utmost care. Although humans have used the oceans of the world for thousands of years as a source of food and transportation, we are just beginning to recognize the enormous potential and diversity of this relatively untapped resource. The oceans offer an almost limitless environment for food, energy production, transportation, minerals, pharmaceuticals, and much more.
In the past, there was little regard for ocean life, which is essential to all life on Earth. We would survive and advance more easily as a species if we take seriously the reclamation of our oceans.

Past Abuses of the Ocean Environment

In August of 1970, the U. S. Army deliberately dumped containers holding 67 tons of nerve gas into the Atlantic Ocean. Worse, the dumping ground was close to a main artery in this life support system, the Gulf Stream, which makes the clean-up all the more urgent. The Navies of the world, the fishing fleets, cruise lines, and many coastal cities casually use the ocean as both trashcan and toilet.
The lack of adequate sanitation is one of the biggest threats to human health. It results in ill-health, disease, and death related to pollution of coastal waters. South Asia alone has 825 million people who live on the
 
coast without basic sanitation facilities. It isn’t hard to understand why the levels of untreated sewage in South Asia’s Coastal waters are the highest in the world. This, besides being a health risk to people, creates toxic algal blooms that cause mass kills of fish, wildlife and coral reefs. (4) Page 28 Transforming the Global Biosphere: Twelve Futuristic Strategies by Elliott Maynard, Ph.D.
Destructive environmental practices are numerous. Large commercial trawlers damage the sea-floor environment on a massive global scale. Their nets crush or bury seabed organisms, destroying their food and nursery grounds. This ecosystem is crucial for replenishing marine seafood stocks. (5) Ibid, page 70.

This process does more damage to the sea bed than clear cutting of the forests does to the Earth’s surface. A single pass kills from 5 to 20 percent of seafloor animals, and this goes on twenty-four hours-a-day seven days- a-week, year round on a global scale. (6) Ibid, Page 70-71.
Mismanagement of run-off has created huge lifeless areas in the Gulf of Mexico where the Mississippi River drains. Destructive business practices have over fished the waters to the point where most of the larger more productive reproducing fish are close to extinction. Throughout the world, major marine species and the coral reefs that nurture them are rapidly disappearing, but not naturally, or because their death in any way prolongs our way of life. On the contrary, these extinctions endanger us and derive from our own arrogance and ignorance. Even to the most complex living ecology, we act as predators.

New Respect of the Web of Life

With the resource based economy comes new value systems. Since no one gains financially through the wasteful practices of the past, the main objective is to reclaim and maintain a healthy and productive environment. If the oceans are intelligently managed, they can easily supply more than enough resources to feed the world’s hungry. Billions could depend on the sea, where life is abundant and varied, for their primary source of protein. Although the overwhelming majority of sea life dwells near the surface, in the chill murky depths miles below where even sunlight never ventures, life abounds despite fantastic pressures and temperatures. In near-freezing temperatures, boiling vents of toxic gasses support a wide variety of sea life that remains to be studied.

Great rivers, called currents, cross the oceans of the planet, set in motion by Earth’s rotation. These immense oceanic currents travel at varying
 
speeds, at different depths, and even in opposite directions. It is estimated that the Gulf Stream carries about 30 million cubic meters of water per second past Miami, Florida. This is more than five times the combined flow of all the fresh water rivers of the world.

By harnessing this potential energy, it is estimated that close to a thousand million watts on a 24-hour basis -- or as much as two large nuclear plants – could be generated, without environmental contamination or radiation danger.

In addition, powerful winds, waves, and currents provide us with enormous potential sources of electric power. Energy “crops” can be farmed from biomass by converting waste organic materials into gaseous or liquid fuels. Additional energy can be obtained from fermentation. Imagine a pile of decaying food and other organic matter. This pile of biomass gives off heat and gasses. This potential source of energy can be harnessed and used with proper technology.
On the sea floors and in the brine-filled waters themselves are vast storehouses of metals and minerals that can be used to help resolve resource shortages. However, “harvesting” the metals and minerals will require new technologies that do not disturb the fragile sea floor.

These are but a few of the massive ocean projects that can be explored. Perhaps more exciting are designs for Cities in the Sea.
Cities in the Sea

Colonization of the oceans is one of the last frontiers remaining on Earth. Prodigious oceanic city communities are inevitable and will be among the greatest achievements of a new society.

To fully utilize this bountiful wellspring of resources, we must develop large marine structures to explore the relatively untapped riches of the world’s oceans. They will provide improved mariculture, fresh water production, power, and mining, which will offset land-based mining shortages. The oceans can provide almost unlimited riches in pharmaceuticals, chemicals, fertilizers, minerals, oil, natural gas, sweet water, and tidal and wind power, to name a few. Ocean-based and space-borne sensors would constantly track tidal flow, marine life, water composition and temperature, atmospheric conditions, and myriad other vital signs.
The development of these ocean communities would greatly relieve land- based population pressures. The population of such cities could vary from
 
several hundred to many thousand and they could be located throughout the world. They would be controlled, managed, and operated primarily by automated systems, and would be part of the international communications network. The oceans are, after all, essential to our survival and are a critical part of Earth’s carrying capacity.
Use

Some of these cities could serve as universities and research centers where students from all nations could study marine sciences and management. They could also serve as monitoring stations of ocean currents, weather patterns, marine ecology, pollution, and geologic phenomena. For additional marine exploration, robotic submersibles would be designed and made available to everyone.

Other sea platforms could be used as rocket-launching systems. Space vehicles launched at the equator would save energy because the equator is the fastest moving portion of the earth. Locating launch sites there would take full advantage of Earth’s rotation for additional thrust, requiring fewer thruster burns to reach geocentric orbit (the orbit where a satellite rotates with Earth and remains in a stationary position relative to it). For polar orbits, the launch platforms would be located off the west coast of the U. S. with computerized control and command systems located on ships or on the platforms themselves.
Not all areas of the oceans need to be used for technological development. Vast areas can be set aside for reclamation, enhancement, and preservation, making them a priority for global conservation.
For instance, the Caribbean and the Emerald Shoals of the vast banks of Eleuthera feature some of the clearest waters in the Bahamas and one of the most beautiful coral atolls in the Western Hemisphere. The waters surrounding these islands vary in hue from the magnificent deep blue of the Gulf Stream to shimmering shades of green. Similar areas exist in the South Pacific and many other locations throughout the world, where thousands of miles of shoreline remain unmarred by human habitation. In a new spirit of world cooperation, many of these areas can be set aside as international marine parks for the education and enjoyment of all. In these areas the only human intervention is to preserve and protect aquatic sanctuaries.
 
Life Styles on the Sea Cities

Future cities of the sea offer new and fascinating lifestyles for millions of inhabitants and are a favorite destination for all. Some would serve as underwater international parks where visitors observe the great protected reefs of the world. Through huge undersea windows they would be able to view the wonders of this environment in leisure and comfort; from a computerized chair, they could communicate with dolphins and other forms of marine life. Diving expeditions can be made through airlocks, and people are able to participate in research, sailing, scuba diving, and all the amenities that sea cities offer along with many other surface and sub-surface water activities -- without disturbing the balance of the marine environment.
Construction
Massive ocean structures would exist both above and beneath the sea. These structures would represent a spectacular engineering achievement with aircraft, sea craft, and submersible access. One of the most efficient designs would be a circular configuration, multi-storied, and fabricated of steel, using glass of superior strength and pre-stressed concrete reinforced with carbon fibers.

Some would be floating while others would be built on pilings with flotation barriers to prevent wind and heavy seas from damaging the structures. In deeper waters the floating platforms could be anchored to the seabed. Other ocean platforms could float freely, being self-propelled and extremely stable, ballasted by columns about 20 feet in diameter that penetrate 150 feet below the surface. To keep the platforms steady in any type of weather, the lower portions of these floating, cylindrical columns would contain a series of disks that extend out about six feet, spaced approximately ten feet apart. A belt surrounding the entire project would act as a breakwater.

Some of these cities can be constructed in technically developed countries and towed to their destination in sections, or as complete operating systems, similar to the manner in which oil platforms are transported to their destinations now. Other configurations would be variable composite structures, assembled on site and modified to serve many different functions, with the ability to be disassembled and relocated if required.
Other above-surface structures anchored to the seabed would serve as efficient bases for mining operations. These dome-shaped structures could
 
be almost totally automated, their flotation levels adjusted by flooding or emptying buoyancy chambers. They would be constructed in dry dock, towed to their destination, and then submerged and anchored into place. A floating dock system, which rises and falls with the tides and accommodates both surface and submersible craft, could be part of this design.
All marine development must be in full accord with the total carrying capacity and sustainability of the ocean environment. In the future, before any of these projects are built, the designers will account for the possible negative impact on the entire hydrosphere – the rivers, estuaries, lakes and oceans.

Energy
On these and other floating cities or platforms, powerful wind turbines can capture the ocean breezes. Solar and wind power generators are located on most of the upper decks. Cold water from the depths of the ocean can also be pumped up for uses such as the conversion of temperature differences into electrical energy. This process would provide a continuous supply of electricity far in excess of the cities’ needs.

Mariculture

Mariculture, the planned cultivation of marine crops, and fish farming communities, can be designed to support more than one type of marine life. A mutually supporting symbiotic relationship can be sustained while emulating natural conditions as closely as possible. A wide variety of aquatic plants may be cultivated in multiple layers and suspended by cables in underwater fields adjacent to the cities. In some instances, the tops of plants could be harvested automatically, leaving the roots and lower third of the plant to grow new crops without replanting.

These floating ocean platforms would be equipped with solar-operated desalinization plants, which would extract fresh water for hydroponics farming and other uses. Upwelling can also be harnessed to extract deep- sea nutrients to supply aquaculture farming. Of course, any attempt at aquaculture or mariculture would be subject to international monitoring of ocean farms.

This provides fish farming complexes and introduces the most advanced principles of poly-culture, which maintains the reproduction and natural balance of species. Every precaution would be taken to avoid disrupting
 
or spoiling the spawning grounds that have sustained the human race for centuries.
Transportation

Immense floating structures can be equipped with loading and docking facilities for vessels. Huge ships that serve as processing plants could transport passengers and freight to these cities in the sea as well.

The upper deck of the sea cities would have a landing area for helicopters or VTOL aircraft. Computerized lift-units would facilitate vertical, horizontal, and radial travel within these structures.
Joint Venture

Where a project of this magnitude is concerned, like other resources, it is imperative that benefits be shared equally by the entire global community. The mineral wealth of the oceans and the other resources of our world must be shared by all nations as the common heritage of humankind.
 
Artificial Islands in the Sea

This artificial island in the sea is designed to serve the oceanographic sciences. Multiple docking and landing facilities for VTOL aircraft surround the entire island. Water-based recreation is part of life in these water- borne communities. People can participate in research, sailing, scuba diving, and many other surface and sub-surface activities without disturbing the balance of the marine environment.


Cities in the Sea

From the tops of these structures, a cylindrical concrete conduit extends 150 feet above the ocean surface. At surface level, it is encircled by a floating dock system, which rises and falls with the tides and accommodates both surface and submersible craft.
 
Cities in the Sea


Thousands of self-sufficient cities in the sea, varying in design according to their location and function, alleviate land-based population pressures. Some serve as oceanographic universities to survey and maintain a dynamic balance in the oceanographic environment.














 


 



 
Ocean Mining Mega-Structures


These “cities in the sea” provide improved mariculture, fresh water production, power, and deep-ocean mining, which helps alleviate shortages of



land-based minerals. Such structures provide us with almost unlimited resources in pharmaceuticals, chemicals, fertilizers, minerals, metals, oil, natural gas, drinking water, and ocean farming, as well as tidal and wind power and more.



Construction of a Floating Mega-Structure


These illustrations depict a “floating mega-structure” that is being assembled in a dry dock entirely by robotized automated systems free of any human intervention. After construction, these structures are towed in sections or as completed units to locations where they are anchored to the seabed. In some instances, these cities can even travel and relocate.
City in the Sea With Modular Freighter

 
City in the Sea Modular Freighter


This modular freighter, leaving a city in the sea, consists of detachable sections that can be rapidly loaded or unloaded. The number of sections varies, depending on the amount of freight to be delivered. When all the modules are connected, they are propelled as a single unit. When the freight arrives at its destination, the selected modules can be disconnected and towed to docks.



Apartments in the Sea Cities

Through huge undersea windows, occupants are able to view the wonders of this environment in leisure and comfort. From a computerized chair, they communicate with dolphins and other forms of marine life.
 
Floating Sea Domes


These unsinkable floating sea domes provide for those who prefer unique offshore or island living. In the event of severely inclement weather, they can easily be towed ashore, mounted, and locked to elevated support structures. They are equipped with retractable enclosures that cover the outer deck.


Solar Panels at Sea

On these and other floating cities or platforms, powerful wind turbines capture the ocean breezes.
Solar and wind power generators are located on most of the upper decks and in the ocean as well.
 
Mariculture


Mariculture (the planned cultivation of marine crops) and fish farming communities are designed to support more than one type of marine life. Many of these communities maintain a balance of species in mutually supporting symbiotic relationships, while emulating natural conditions as closely as possible.



