Chapter Three

Using the Scientific Method





What Have We Here

Until scientific inquiry came of age, human beings could not comprehend their relationship to the physical world, so they invented their own explanations. These explanations tended to be simplistic and in many cases, harmful. For example, if one knows a tidal wave is approaching and chooses to stay and pray for deliverance rather than leaving, this could be detrimental to his/her survival. People used to believe that plagues and diseases were retributions of an angry God, but the scientific method found that many diseases were carried by rats and lice, and caused by germs.
It is not that scientists are close-minded regarding these issues—it’s just that their acceptance of ideas requires more sophisticated standards and methods of inquiry.

The scientific method helps to diminish biases, prejudices, and preconceived notions. The method requires that statements be verified and that researchers find out through experimentation just what works and what doesn’t. Scientists ask the question “what do we have here?” and then they proceed to do experiments to determine the nature of the physical world.
This process requires that experiments be verified by others who must get the same results. One of the major developments in science was the realization that we can not acquire answers to problems just intuitively. It requires painstaking laborious effort and time to find solutions and answers. Often many failures come before any new findings.

The Language of Science

The communication of ideas and information usually starts with language, but when you see how misunderstood you may be in daily life, you know this can be a confusing task. Our everyday language evolved through centuries of cultural change and unfortunately, it is difficult to resolve conflicting ideas by using it. In most instances, because of varying
 
backgrounds and life experiences, the same word can have different meanings for different people. One’s thoughts may be interpreted differently by others even when using the same language.

But there is a language that is easily understood by many, even in different parts of the world. This language has a high degree of physical correlation with the real world. There is little to no confusion in it. In different scientific fields such as engineering, mathematics, chemistry, and other technical areas, we have the nearest thing to a descriptive universal language that leaves little room for one’s own unique interpretation.

For instance, if a blueprint for an automobile is given to any technologically developed society anywhere in the world, regardless of political or religious belief, the finished product will be the same. This language was deliberately designed as a more appropriate way to state a problem. It is nearly free of vague interpretations and ambiguities.

Many of the great technical strides made in our modern day would have been unattainable without this improved communication. Without a common descriptive language, we would have been unable to prevent diseases, increase crop yields, talk over thousands of miles, or build bridges, dams, transportation systems, and the many other technological marvels of this computerized age.

Applying and understanding General Semantics is essential to improving communication. Semantics has been defined in many different ways.
Briefly, it is an attempt to improve communication through the careful use of language. For example, terms like “Arab”, “Jew”, or “Irishman” have slightly different meanings to different people. Similar words have various meanings depending on differences in background and experience. This also applies to words like understanding, conscience, democracy, reality, love, etc. To have intelligent discussions using certain words, it is essential to ask what one means by the words being used. If one wishes to communicate in a meaningful way, it is best to have people define their terms. Semantics is just one instrument that may help improve communication. A useful book for this subject is Tyranny of Words by Stuart Chase.
Can we apply the Methods of Science to how we Design our Society?

The discovery of scientific principles enables us to validate and test many proposals. If someone claims that a certain structural element can support a specific number of pounds per square inch, this statement can be tested and either accepted or rejected based on the test results. It is this
 
testing which enables us to design and construct bridges, buildings, ships, aircraft, and other mechanical wonders.

Almost everyone you know will go for the scientific way when it comes to surgery, airplane rides, or building things like skyscrapers, bridges, and cars. Over the centuries, we seem to have developed a consensus that when it comes to matters of personal safety, we will go with the science rather than the magic. Why is that? Probably because it works, and everybody can see that it does.

Then why don’t we do that when it comes to planning our societies: our cities, transportation systems, agriculture, health care, and so on? If you thought we were already doing all those things scientifically, look again! If science has a lot to do with what works, then clearly there’s much about today’s social and economic setup that isn’t scientific, because things aren’t working very well for a majority of the world’s population or the environment. If they were, war, poverty, hunger, homelessness, pollution, etc., would not be so prevalent today. Unfortunately, our social structures evolved with no overall global planning.
One condition for the assignment of redesigning society is that your social design must live within the carrying capacity of our planet. This means our resources have to support life on the planet for everyone. This will certainly require scientific methods of evaluation.

If one wishes to put a person on the moon, one cannot just build a rocket and head for the moon. We must first test what forces the human body can stand. We would put a person in a centrifuge to see just how many “G’s” the body can withstand. We would put a person through a barrage of tests. For instance, we would test to see how the body functions in a gravity- free environment and the effects on human health. We would also need to have information about survival possibilities on the moon; for example, is there water, air, an acceptable temperature range, etc.
In much the same way, we must look at the entire planet as a whole and ask “what have we here?” We want to apply this same intelligent method of planning using a scientific system of Earth sciences for planetary survival. The degree to which we don’t apply this scientific method to the way we live on Earth may very well determine the unnecessary amount of suffering that will occur.

How do we do this?
