Chapter Eight Fear of Machines





Many people fear a “takeover” by machines, but there has never been a single act or plan by machines to hurt anyone. (Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of human beings.) Humans, not machines, use nerve gas and missiles to destroy. Even automobile and aircraft accidents are mostly caused by human error rather than by mechanical failures.

Many people fear rapid technological developments, especially automated and cybernated machines, replacing human beings. To be fair, some of these fears are justified in a monetary system where rapid increases in production technology require fewer workers.

Some distrust a computerized society and fear possible failures of the machines. They worry that technology will make us more like machines, driving us toward uniformity, and resulting in the loss of individuality, freedom of choice, and privacy.

In defense of machines, there is no evidence of machines acting against human beings on their own, except in science fiction stories. Humans program machines and direct their use. It is not machines that are to be feared; it is the misuse and misdirection of these machines that threaten humankind. We must not forget that the bombing of cities, the use of nerve gas, prisons, death camps, and torture chambers have all been managed and operated by human beings, not machines. Even atomic weapons and guided missiles were built and directed by people. People pollute the environment -- our air, oceans, and rivers. The use and sale of harmful drugs, the distortion of truth, bigotry, and racial hatred are all part of flawed human systems and false indoctrination, and hardly characteristic of machines.
Machines are not the danger. We are. As long as we do not take responsibility for our relationship to fellow human beings and the intelligent management of our planetary resources, we are the greatest danger to the planet. If there ever were a conflict between people and machines, we know who would start it!
 
Science and technology create none of our problems. Our problems arise from human abuse and misuse of other people, the environment, and technology. In a more humane civilization, machines are used to shorten the workday, increase the availability of goods and services, and lengthen vacation time. New technology is used to raise the standard of living for everyone, and in this way, increasing the use of machine technology serves to benefit all people.
 
