Chapter Four Existing Myths



Human Nature

In everyday life, we observe the inter-connections between physical events all around us. But we often fail to observe the same connections we see in the physical sciences when it comes to human behavior. When we examine human behavior in the same manner as we examine physical phenomena, we will better understand the physical factors responsible for shaping our values and behavior.

In the natural sciences, physical phenomena are acted upon by a large number of forces. For example, a plant does not grow unless it is acted upon by nutrients, gravity, water, the sun, and much more. A
sailboat does not sail of its own accord; rather, it is activated by the wind and many other variables.

There is no fixed predetermined human nature. We are not born with prejudice, bigotry, or anger; those are developed from our experiences. We should not be preoccupied with the erroneous concept of human nature, but should rather examine human behavior, which has always been changing-- otherwise we would still be living in caves.

Human behavior is just as subject to external forces as anything else in the natural world. Today sciences of human behavior are less developed because they focus primarily on people and not sufficiently on the environmental conditions that “program” the individual. You cannot identify the factors responsible for behavior through the study of individuals alone. Rather, we must study the cultures in which people are nurtured. The differences between a Native American, a thief, and a banker are not found in their genes, but instead reflect the environments in which they were raised. A Chinese baby does not learn to speak Chinese any faster than an American baby learns English. If one closely examines the effects of society on human behavior, we can readily
identify the type of environment a person comes from. The extent of social environmental influence is reflected in languages, facial expressions and body movements.

Human behavior is lawful and generated by many interacting variables in
 
the environment. This includes both constructive and socially offensive behaviors. The social environment consists of our family life, nutrition, love, or lack thereof, purchasing power, sexual preferences, role models on TV, books, radio, internet, education, religious background, the people one associates with, and all the other interacting variables in one’s life.

In general, collective values are influenced by the existing social structure and sub-cultures within a society. For better or worse, social systems tend to perpetuate themselves with all of their strengths and shortcomings. Whether we realize it or not, most people are constantly manipulated by the media and established institutions which influence the national “agenda”. This, in turn, influences much of our behavior, expectations, and values. Our notions of right and wrong, and our concepts of morality are also part of our cultural heritage and experiences. This method of control does not require the use of physical force, and has been so successful that few recognize or feel the manipulations.

Many people think greed is a part of human nature. Since people lived with scarcity or the threat of scarcity for centuries, that has developed behavioral patterns such as greed, and admiration of those who have accumulated wealth through crime, embezzlement, and more. These patterns have been with us for centuries so many think it is just human nature and can not be changed. But consider this example: if it rained gold for a week, people in a scarcity culture would rush outside and fill their houses with gold. If the rain of gold continued for years, they would sweep it out of their houses and throw away their gold rings. In an environment of abundance and emotional security, many negative patterns would no longer be prevalent.
People raised in a monetary system where the bottom line is profit are likely to outsource portions of their business rather than be concerned with the well-being of their country and employees. The nature of our social institutions perpetuates this behavior. For example, if a moderate sized company were concerned with the well-being of employees and provided medical care, playgrounds for children, and a higher wage scale, it would not attract as many investors as a similar sized company that outsources and invests in advertising and new machines would. The more humane company will not be in business very long. Predatory behavior comes to dominate so that one can survive in the business world. This is not human nature but a byproduct of the culture.

In an environment of great scarcity of foodstuffs, people horde food.
 
This behavior results from the scarcity of food. But on a South Sea island with low population and abundant food, human behavior is quite different. When fish are caught, they are shared with everyone.

Many other examples show how environment sets patterns and values are. In a hostile environment, smaller people will tend to develop the weapons. After World War II, even the most respectable German families fought over scraps of food in garbage cans to survive. In a scarcity- oriented society, generosity is a rare occurrence. If a girl is very attractive by established social standards, she will attract many male admirers. On the other hand, when a girl is less attractive, she tends to develop other attributes to level the playing field. People with little knowledge of the physical world tend to see gods and demons as the prime controllers of natural phenomena. There was a time when men of great strength were admired and held in high esteem in armies. The advent of the gun tended to equalize their combat abilities. There have been wars ever since people have been on earth, and many attribute this to human nature. But it is really the scarcity of resources, which causes territorial disputes.

Many people today see genes as a reason for aberrant behavior, but the major influences have been shown to be environmental. Genetic makeup alone does not fully explain or illuminate human behavior. The sciences of human behavior deal with a complex system of genes, environmental conditions (food, shelter, family dynamics, education, religious training, personal experiences), and the interpretation and decisions people make about the world and their place in it.
What is considered appropriate behavior today may be considered
un-sane in the future. One question that remains is how much of our value system is programmed by society’s efforts to perpetuate existing and established institutions. It is not human nature, but human behavior that we need to be concerned with. That can easily be changed by appropriate and relevant education, and the design of an environment that coincides with the carrying capacity of the earth. Better values, ideals, and behavior cannot be fully realized while there is still hunger, unemployment, deprivation, war, and poverty.
The Rule of Law

Many people feel that we need the rule of law to eliminate our problems. But is it more laws that we need? We have many laws – thousands upon thousands of them - but they are constantly being broken.
 
For instance, there are thousands of laws against stealing. But if we examine this more closely and look at the statistics, we find that a few people control most of the earth’s resources. Most people have insufficient money to purchase even the barest of necessities. How can we think that without altering these conditions, the passing of a law will prevent stealing? This is even more difficult when advertising makes products so enticing. Almost unknowingly, people in the US are exposed to over 2500 advertisements a day.

Even a peace treaty cannot prevent another war if the underlying causes are not dealt with. Laws for international cooperation do not deal with the reasons we need the laws -- they just tend to freeze things as they are.
Regardless of treaties, nations that have conquered land all over the world by force and violence still retain their positions of territorial and resource advantage. Treaties are only a band-aid on the problems and usually only work to postpone conflict for a short time.
Perhaps what is needed are different people in government, ethical people who are concerned about others. Maybe they will wipe out corruption and work towards everyone’s well-being. But even if the most ethical people were elected to high position and we ran out of resources, there would still be lying, cheating, stealing, and corruption. It is not ethical people that are needed but rather a way of intelligently managing the Earth’s resources for everyone’s well-being.

Examining the Conditions that Cause the Problems

Perhaps the solutions to these problems lie elsewhere than in the enactment of more laws or appointing ethical people to government. Perhaps we should look at how we currently obtain and distribute the goods that we need.

This is done by “earning” money, either by exchanging one’s time, skills, and efforts, or by “investing” in the financial system with the thought of getting more money in return, and exchanging that money for goods and services. This may have been a good method in the past when goods were scarce and technology was in its infancy, but today our advanced technologies could be the tools for a very different scenario.

If we look at things scientifically, there is more than enough food and material goods on Earth to take care of all people’s needs – if managed correctly. There is enough to enable everyone to have a very high standard of living with the intelligent use of technology, resources, and technical personnel. When we say the use of technology, we mean
 
technology that is not harmful to people or the environment and doesn’t waste time and energy.

Consider this: when there is a recession and people have little money to buy things, isn’t the Earth still the same place? Aren’t there still goods on the store shelves and land to grow crops? It is just the rules of the game that we play by that are obsolete and cause so much suffering.
The existence of money is hardly ever questioned or examined, but let’s consider our use of money. Money itself does not have any value. It is just a picture on a cheap piece of paper with an agreement among people as to what it can buy. If it rained hundred dollar bills tomorrow, everyone would be happy except the bankers.

There are many disadvantages to using this old method of exchange for goods and services. We will consider just a few here and let you add to this list on your own.

1.	Money is just an interference between what one needs and what one is able to get. It is not money that people need, it is access to resources.
2.	The use of money results in social stratification and elitism based primarily on economic disparity.
3.	People are not equal without equal purchasing power.

4.	Most people are slaves to jobs they do not like because they need the money.

5.	There is tremendous corruption, greed, crime, embezzlement, and more caused by the need for money.

6.	Most laws are enacted for the benefit of corporations, which have enough money to lobby, bribe, or persuade government officials to make laws that serve their interests.

7.	Those who control purchasing power have greater influence.

8.	Money is used to control the behavior of those with limited purchasing power.

9.	Goods such as foods are sometimes destroyed to keep prices up; when things are scarce prices increase.
 
10.	There is tremendous waste of material and strain on available resources from superficial design changes for newer later fads each year in order to create continuous markets for manufacturers.

11.	There is tremendous environmental degradation due to the high cost of better methods of waste disposal.
12.	The Earth is being plundered for profit.

13.	The benefits of technology are only distributed to those with sufficient purchasing power.

14.	Most important, when the corporation’s bottom line is profit, decisions in all areas are made not for the benefit of people and the environment, but primarily for the acquisition of wealth, property, and power.

Next Phase in Social Development.

What is it that we all have in common? Where should our priorities lie? All nations and people, regardless of political philosophy, religious beliefs, or social customs, depend upon natural resources; we all need clean air and water, arable land for food, and the necessary technology and personnel to maintain a high standard of living. Perhaps we should update the way society works so everyone on earth can take advantage of our technological ability to maintain a clean environment and a high standard of living. There is not enough money to begin to pay for this type of change, but there are more than enough resources on Earth to create it.

To review: the Earth has abundant resources and our practice of rationing these resources through the use of money is an outdated method which causes much suffering.

It is not money that we need but the intelligent management of the earth’s resources for the benefit of everyone. We could best work towards achieving this by using a resource based economy.

Recourse-based Economy

This is a very different concept than anything else put forth today. To put it simply, a resource-based economy uses resources rather than money, and people have access to whatever they need without the use of money, credits, barter, or any other form of debt or servitude. All of the
 
world's resources are held as the common heritage of all of Earth’s people.

The real wealth of any nation is not its money, but the developed and potential resources and the people who work toward the elimination of scarcity for a more humane society.

If this is still confusing to you consider this: If a group of people were stranded on an island with money, gold, and diamonds, but the island had no arable land, fish or clean water, their wealth would be irrelevant to their survival.

What if all the money in the world suddenly disappeared? As long as topsoil, factories, and other resources still remained, we could build anything we chose to build and fulfill our material needs. The bottom line is that money is not what people really need; rather, it is access to the necessities of life.
In a resource-based economy, resources are used directly to enhance the lives of our total population. In an economy based on resources rather than money, we can easily produce all of the necessities of life and provide a very high standard of living for everyone.
