Chapter Six Future By Design



Emerging Into a Saner Future First Steps
To begin implementing a resource-based economy, social designers must utilize the scientific method and pose the question “What do we have here?” With the requirement that all be provided for in the most efficient, comfortable, and enduring manner possible, the first priority is making a purely technical assessment of basic needs of the total global population. The amount of housing, food, water, health care, transportation, education, and such needed, must be compared to the available resources the planet has to offer. This has to be balanced with the needs of other species that make up the web of life on Earth.
The main objective is to overcome scarcity and provide for the needs of all the world’s people. In order to create a workable and sustainable civilization as quickly as possible, we need vast amounts of energy. What is desperately needed is an energy development strategy on a global scale, requiring a joint venture of international planning on a level never before achieved.

Energy

One of the most useful measures of the development of civilization is the amount of available energy per person. To a large extent the degree of physical comfort you enjoy today correlates with the energy at your disposal. Imagine the paralyses that would occur if your electricity and gasoline supply were cut off, and you had to use your own muscles to get things done.

The resource-based economy quickly goes to work on clean sources of energy. This is only possible when there are no more monetary limitations in the way of accomplishing or providing what’s needed. With the restrictions of profit, property, and scarcity eliminated, research labs would quickly begin working together and sharing information freely. There would be no need for patents or proprietary information since the end goal is not to make money in order to continue working, but to achieve
 
results that are freely and quickly available to the planet’s entire population.

This is a project that many people would be eager and grateful to work on, when the results immediately benefit all people. Interdisciplinary teams of qualified personnel, in line with the project’s requirements, will work on energy and automated systems to produce and supply goods and services on a massive scale. Also, the university students will participate in arriving at methods of solving these problems.

These can be the armies of the future, a large peaceful mobilization to restore and preserve the earth and its people. This has never been done before and can only be done when money is no obstacle. The question is not do we have the money, but do we have the resources and means to accomplish this new direction.

During the transition from one system to another, scarcity regions are provided with heat concentrators for cooking and sterilizing water. Foods for those areas are dehydrated and compressed to save shipping space. The packaging is biodegradable and may double as non-contaminating fertilizers. Regions without arable land will use hydroponic farms, land- based fish farms, and sea farming. To conserve energy during the transition, instead of each family preparing food, food distribution centers offer high-quality food shipped directly to homes and restaurants. These massive methods of supplying goods and services are applied throughout the world.
Vast sources of energy will be explored and developed. These include wind, wave and tidal action, ocean currents, temperature differentials, falling water, geothermal, hydrogen, natural gas, algae, biomass, bacteria, phase transformation, and thermionics (the conversion of heat into electricity by boiling electrons off a hot metal surface and condensing them on a cooler surface). Additionally, there is the potential of solar thermal power generators to concentrate heat by using Fresnel lenses.

Fusion energy is the same energy that drives the cosmos and the stars. When we learn how to harness it, the world’s energy problems will be solved forever, without any detrimental effects or dangerous toxic materials to be disposed of. The only residue would be the clean ash of helium.

Oceanographers told us in the late twentieth century that if we tapped the vast energy potential of the world's oceans occupying 70.8% of the
 
earth's surface, we could easily meet present and future energy needs for millions of years to come.

A key element in the design of cities in the resource-based economy is the embedding of all necessary energy harnessing within the structure of the city itself. This will be further explained in the “City” section.

Another vast untapped energy option is the development of piezoelectric materials, e.g. as inside laminated cylinders, which are activated by the rising and falling tides.

Geothermal power, or power extracted from the heat of the earth, is being used throughout the world with tremendous success. Scientists predict that if we develop and harness only 1% of the geothermal energy available in the crust of the earth, our energy problems would be eliminated. With no monetary restriction in the resource-based economy, society would have the chance to prove those scientists right.

Geothermal energy can supply more than 500 times the energy contained in all the world’s fossil fuel resources while reducing the threat of global warming. Geothermal power plants produce very little pollution compared to fossil fuels, and emit no nitrogen oxide or carbon dioxide. A relatively small area of land is required for the power plant itself. Without oil and natural gas companies controlling a monetary economy, geothermal power would become the most economical and efficient way to heat and cool buildings. If we were to apply just one tenth of what is currently spent on military equipment to the development of geothermal generators, we could have long ago solved our energy shortages.

In areas such as Iceland, geothermal energy is used to grow plants year round in enclosed areas. In the resource-based economy using this method, enormous amounts of fresh vegetables can be cultivated in all seasons. A similar process can be used for fish farming and in regions where heating and cooling are needed. Massive underwater structures could run a portion of the flow of the Gulf Stream through large turbines to generate clean electric power. The turbines would have a centrifugal separator and deflectors to prevent harm to marine life.

A land bridge or tunnel across the Bering Strait between Asia and North America could generate electrical power and collect and process marine products. Beneath and above the ocean surface would be tunnels to transport passengers and materials. Pipelines could bring fresh water from melting icebergs to other parts of the world. This structure
 
would not only provide a physical link between continents, but would also serve as an avenue for social and cultural exchange.

In our resource-based economy, there are comprehensive studies of the environmental and human impact before starting any large projects. The major concern is to protect and restore the environment for the benefit of all living creatures in the community of life. The purpose of the construction and development of these power projects is to free human beings from unnecessary laborious tasks. In order to achieve this society, we will need to automate most jobs as quickly as possible.
 

 

 

Bering Strait Dam
 
Harnessing the Gulf Stream


These underwater structures divert a portion of the flow of the Gulf Stream and other currents through turbines to generate clean electric power. The turbines are slow turning and would have centrifugal separators and deflectors to prevent harm to marine life.
 

A major development in the
future could be the construction	of
a land bridge or tunnel across the Bering Strait. The primary function of this span would be to generate electrical power and house facilities for collecting and processing marine products.
Beneath and above the ocean
surface would be tunnels to transport passengers and materials. Pipelines to conduct fresh water from melting icebergs to other parts of the world may also be incorporated. Not only could this structure provide a physical link between Asia and North America, it could also serve as an avenue for social and cultural exchange.


Geothermal Energy Plants

Geothermal energy, with refinements in conversion technologies, can take a more prominent role in reducing the threat of global warming. Readily available in many regions throughout the world, this source alone would provide enough clean energy for the next thousand years.
