Chapter Eleven Lifestyles




What Do People Do?

From early civilizations to the present day, most humans have had to work to earn a living. Most of our attitudes about work may be a carry-over from these much earlier times. In the past, it was necessary for people to fetch water and carry it to their dwelling places. They gathered wood to prepare fires for heating and cooking and fuel to burn in their lamps. It would have been very difficult for them to imagine a time when water would rush forth in their own home with the turn of a handle; to press a button for instant light would have seemed to be within the realm of magic. People of ancient times probably wondered what they would do with their time if they did not have to engage in the burdensome tasks that were so necessary to sustain their lives.

Alleviating Human Pressures

Human beings free of debt, insecurity, and fear become much more amiable. With no one out to sell anyone anything or to deprive another of possessions or money, the basis for unhealthy human aggression is outgrown. People no longer are burdened by the nagging concerns that consume so much attention such as mortgages, health care costs, education fees, fire insurance, economic recession or depression, the loss of jobs, and taxes. With the elimination of these burdens and the removal of the conditions that create feelings of envy, greed, and competition, people’s lives would be far more meaningful.
The aim of this new social design is to encourage a new incentive system, one that is no longer directed toward the shallow and self-centered goals of wealth, property, and power. These new incentives encourage people toward self-fulfillment and creativity, the elimination of scarcity, the protection of the environment, and most of all concern for fellow human beings. People would have the means and the time for intellectual and spiritual growth, and the time to realize what it really means to be human in a caring society. Rather than evolving into an age of leisure, people would find very little “free” time, even without having to "work" for a living.
 
There is always need for better more efficient ways of doing things. People will want to participate in the society, seeing how it directly benefits their way of life and others, as things are constantly being updated and changed. There are no Utopias. The very notion of "Utopia" is static. The survival of any social system ultimately depends upon its ability to allow for change to improve society as a whole. However, today, most people are not prepared for changes in society either emotionally or intellectually.
Unburdened by survival concerns, people would have time for individual interests such as continuing their education. Education, if available to everyone without a price tag, could become a never-ending process. The cities of the future would be living universities. Most people would attend schools and university classes or engage in other activities. There would be classes for those interested in theater, photography, painting, ballet, and all of the arts at the music, art, and theater centers. People would be able to go to centers to work on or get help with their new inventions.

New horizons open up for people who dared not even imagine these possibilities in the past due to lack of money or time. It is painful to even imagine a life of limitless possibilities for those who have limited purchasing power.

Today there are many boats at the docks but they are rarely used, let alone available to the majority of people. In this new society, there are more than enough boats provided for anyone’s use to enjoy as they wish. There could be a surge in the number of people learning to fly. Imagine all the other numerous hobbies and sports -- the list of what would be available for people to pursue is endless.

Picture a world opened up for everyone’s exploration, with many people traveling throughout the world, helping in lesser developed areas to bring them up to the highest living standards possible in the shortest time. A world where there is no begging for nickels and dimes for medical and scientific research -- there are major programs for research and development in the medical fields where people can also participate and learn. This process would be the same in all other areas of society.
Rather than specialize, most people would become generalists, learning more about many different disciplines and how they relate to one another. In this way, people would be better able to participate in the development of ideas in many areas of society. There would be so much expansion and experimental exploration in all areas that there would no longer be a concern about who decides which experiments are tried and
 
which are not. Every new design would be subject to exploration, testing, and evaluation, and those proven worthy would be built.

People would take advantage of opportunities to learn how to better communicate with others and resolve differences without violence. They would be introduced to tools for problem solving enabling them to participate in a wide variety of fields and explorations.
The notion of sitting idly by or retiring would become obsolete. People would have so many options that for the first time they could understand what it really means to be a member of a global society with not enough time in the day to do all that they would like.

Without the wasted time, resources, lives, and energy consumed by wars and preparations for war, our energy could be harnessed toward constructive endeavors. Society would be able to devote much more attention and resources to controlling unforeseen variables like tsunamis, earthquakes, hurricanes, and other natural disasters that threaten our lives. This does not imply perfection. There are always challenges and unresolved problems. But there would be a great improvement in life styles and the global society could achieve the highest standards possible for the times, both materially and spiritually.

How Resources are Distributed Equitably
In the world of tomorrow, distribution of goods and services can be accomplished without the use of money or tokens by way of large distribution centers. These centers would be similar to expositions where the advantages of new products are explained and demonstrated.
Exhibition centers would display what is new and available and would be constantly updated.
Throughout the communities, there would be 3-D flat-screen imaging in each home. If you desire an item, an order would be placed and the item automatically delivered directly to your place of residence without a price tag, servitude, or debt of any kind. This would include whatever people need in the way of housing, clothing, education, health care, entertainment, etc.

Raw materials for products can be transported directly to manufacturing facilities by automated transportation "sequences" using boats, monorails, mag-lev trains, pipelines, and pneumatic tubes. An automated computerized inventory system would integrate the distribution centers and manufacturing facilities, coordinating production to meet demand.
 
In this way, a balanced-load economy can be maintained. Shortages, over-runs, and waste are eliminated in this system.

If a person visits Yellowstone National Park, they simply check out a camera or camcorder, use it (even choosing to attend a class to learn the features of the camera and photographic techniques), and then return it to another distribution center or drop-off, eliminating storage and maintenance. This is similar to a public library, but much more informative and inviting. There are so many interesting activities and learning areas at the arts and science centers that people can wander in and out of the sessions until they find something that relates to what they’re looking for.

In this cybernated future, a couple may visit an architectural design center where they sit in front of a clear hemisphere approximately six feet in diameter. One person describes the type of house they would prefer and their areas of interest. The house appears as a 3-dimensional image in the center of the hemisphere. It rotates slowly to present an overview of the interior and exterior. Then the other person describes their major areas of interest and preferences and may suggest a larger balcony. The 3- dimensional image is adjusted accordingly. When they finish requesting changes, the computer presents various alternatives to consider. After deciding on all the alternatives they are able to enter a sensorium to experience a walk-through of their design and continue to make changes. When they arrive at the final design, the construction procedures are set into motion. The computer selects materials for efficiency and durability. None of the architecture is permanent and can be modified and updated at the request of the occupants. This is real individual choice.
In a monetary system most people live near their work with a house, car, and lifestyle they can afford (or, all too often, cannot afford), rather than one they prefer. They are essentially only as free as their purchasing power permits. Many wealthy people select a residence solely to impress others with their status. A resource-based economy changes the function of dwellings from that of status symbol or basic shelter to a reflection of individuality and personal interests.
Family Matters
While new technologies are quite amazing, you may well understand that the most profound effects are not in the technologies, but in our lifestyles

In most cases, our current system requires both husbands and wives to work. Monetary economics undermines family cohesion and childcare.
 
Parents lack adequate time for their children, and are constantly stressed by ever-rising medical bills, insurance payments, educational expenses, and cost of living expenses.

It is in this area that one of the most profound benefits of our new civilization shows. Shorter workdays would provide greater opportunities for family members to pursue areas of personal interest. Free access to goods and services makes home a more pleasant place, and removal of economic stress will reduce family turmoil. Society is designed so people are free to choose their own interests, develop formerly hidden potential, and pursue dreams without government intervention or financial constraint.
