Chapter Five

From one System to Another





The Transition - Signs of the Times

Most people don’t begin to look for an alternative social arrangement until theirs no longer works for them. A change from a system as entrenched in our culture as money will most likely require a collapse of the current system. Some things that are happening today could be signs that this collapse is already underway:

The industrialized nations of the world are installing more and more automated technology in order to compete with low prices in the global economy. The result of this new technology is that more and more people lose their jobs and can’t take care of themselves and their families. With automation and cybernation used to their fullest potential, machines replace not only industrial workers, but also most professionals.
Consequently, fewer people are able to buy the products that automated factories turn out.

A continuous outsourcing of jobs and manufacturing plants to overseas for cheaper labor, fewer environmental restrictions, and other benefits may seem good in the short run but will ultimately prove disastrous. It is likely that the loss of income for a majority of unemployed will become so great that they will lose their homes and possessions.
A number of scientists claim that by the year 2030, there will be a drastic shortage of easily extracted oil. Oil may not run out, but it may become monetarily and then physically impractical to extract it. Eventually, it will require more energy to drill for it and refine it than is practical. It is likely the same will happen with natural gas.

These developments will create tremendous social and environmental disruptions as businesses scramble to protect their profit margins and exploit more of the earth’s land, water, and natural resources. It may take the failure of the debt/money system for the majority of people to lose confidence in it. Then they can examine seriously how a global resource based-economy would operate, and envision what life would be like in
 
such a society. In the chapters that follow, we will glimpse the processes involved in adapting ourselves to this new way of life.
