Chapter One

From Yesterday to Tomorrow





A little background before considering this challenge:

The lives of most men and women are blighted by problems they cannot solve. Many events in our lives are the result of things beyond our control. While it is comforting to think, “I’m in charge,” in truth most changes effected by individuals are very limited in scope. People usually blame themselves or “fate.” However, when two cars collide at an intersection, should we blame the individual drivers, “fate,” or the way transportation is engineered so that it permits collisions in the first place? Are we, as an individual, in charge if the automobile colliding with us is the product of poor design?
In 2005 there were 43,200 thousand deaths in the US from car accidents, plus hundreds of thousands of injuries. But consider another way we get people from one place to another – the elevator. How many people have been killed in collisions between elevators? These devices carry millions of people every day without a single mishap because of their intelligent design. How might highway transportation be similarly arranged?

If you believe that transportation should be designed so that it is almost impossible for anyone to be killed or injured in a collision, these lessons are for you. If you believe that scientific investigation can find out how to restructure society to give each individual a greater opportunity for self- realization and fulfillment, then you will probably appreciate these ideas.
To get the most out of these ideas you will have to blend open- mindedness with skepticism. It is hard enough to face the problems of our own time; it is even more difficult to understand the fantastic and shocking changes that may occur in the future.

Suppose an intelligent man in New York a hundred years ago sat down one evening with a book predicting life a century later. He would refuse to believe that almost everyone in 2006 would be able to operate a horseless carriage that could zip about at 60 miles per hour or more. He may have thought the designers had gone too far.
 


He would smile smugly at the ridiculous prediction of man-made flying machines traveling faster than the speed of sound. The thought of sending pictures and sounds throughout the world instantly would have sounded impossible to such a person a hundred years ago. It would have seemed incredible to him that war would develop to the point where one small bomb, directed in real time from half way around the world, could destroy an entire city with pin-point accuracy. Our early 20th century gentleman would have been alarmed that part of his wages could be withheld to provide for retirement.
At this point let us leave our gentleman muttering to himself about the world moving too fast and a future that has gone too far.

Are we any more flexible or farsighted today? In order to design a future of positive change, we must first become expert at changing our minds. The differences between the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries will probably be small compared to the changes that will take place in the rest of our own century.
For a better understanding, just try to see today as a stepping-stone between yesterday and tomorrow. They will also need sensitivity to the injustices, lost opportunities for happiness, and deadly conflicts that characterize our twenty-first century civilization.

We have no crystal ball for the rest of the twenty-first century. We want you to feed these ideas into your own mental computer and experience. You may find even better ideas that can play a part in molding the future of our civilization. In the rest of these pages, we’ll explore unfamiliar, alarming, exciting, and attainable possibilities for the design of the future.

A Crisis That Needs to be Addressed

One would think that with our technology we could eliminate most social ills. Couldn’t modern technology supply enough food, clothing, shelter, and material goods for all if used intelligently? What is stopping us from achieving this? Technology is racing forward but our societies are still based on concepts and methods devised centuries ago. We still have a society based on scarcity and the use of money. We still have thinking patterns based on old structures used several thousand years ago. We are trying to adjust to the rapid advances in technology with obsolete values that no longer work in today’s world.
 
Because of tremendous advantages given corporations by lawmakers who owe them their positions, monopolies are gaining more control. The comforting assumption that “I can make a difference” is farther and farther from reality. Fewer corporations own more and more companies. Many of the same people sit on the boards of various major corporations besides their own. The corporations that own car and aircraft companies may also own food, radio, TV stations, magazines, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing, and armament companies. Ten major lending institutions control virtually all the credit cards in the U.S. The wealth and influence of these corporate elite can not be equaled or countered by the workers who enabled them to acquire such wealth. With media companies today owned and sponsored by large corporations, it is difficult to know whether the news can be trusted.
According to many polls, a majority of scientists think that the human race is on a “collision course” with nature, that all of Earth’s ecosystems are suffering, and that the ability of the planet to sustain life is in serious jeopardy. There is a threat of rapid global climate change that will certainly have profound consequences. The pollution of rivers, land, and the air we breathe threatens our health. We are destroying non- renewable resources like topsoil and the ozone layer instead of using these resources intelligently. We face common threats that transcend national boundaries: overpopulation, energy shortages, water scarcity, economic catastrophe, the spread of uncontrollable diseases, and the technological displacement of people by machines, to name a few.

What has been handed down to us does not seem to be working for the majority of people. With the advances in science and technology over the last two hundred years, you may be asking: “does it have to be this way?” With the observable fact that scientific knowledge makes our lives better when applied with concern for human welfare and environmental protection, there is no question that science and technology can produce abundance so that no one has to go without. But the misuse and abuse of technology seems to make things worse.

The problems we face in the world today are mostly of our own making. We must accept that our future depends on us. While the values represented by religious leaders over the centuries have inspired many to act in a socially responsible manner, others have gone to war over their differences in religious beliefs. Hopes for divine intervention by mythical characters are delusions that cannot solve the problems of our modern world. The future of the world is our responsibility and it depends upon decisions we make today. We are our own salvation or damnation.
 
The shape and solutions of the future rely totally on the collective effort of people working together. We are all an integral part of the web of life.
What affects other people and the environment has consequences in our own lives as well.

What is needed is a change in our sense of direction and purpose -- an alternative vision for a sustainable new world civilization unlike any in the past. Although this vision is highly compressed here, it is based on years of study and experimental research.

These writings offer possible alternatives for striving toward a better world. It arrives at decisions using the scientific method. Like any new approach, it requires some imagination and a willingness to consider the unconventional in order to be appreciated. Remember that almost every new concept was ridiculed, rejected, and laughed at when first presented, especially by the experts of the time.

That’s what happened to the first scientists who said the earth was round, the first who said it went around the sun, and the first who thought people could learn to fly. You could write a whole book, and many have, just on things that people thought were impossible up until the time they happened. Imagine going to the moon, for example! Your great- grandparents would have laughed at such a notion! Such notions were the ramblings of science fiction writers. Many forward-thinking people have been locked up and even executed for saying such things as the earth wasn’t the center of the universe.
Those who fought for social justice and change had even greater difficulties. People advocating change were beaten, abused, put in prison, and brutally murdered. For example, Wangari Maathai, who was awarded the 2004 Nobel Peace Price on December 10, 2004 was tear gassed, beaten unconscious, and imprisoned for fighting against deforestation in Kenya, Africa. Dianne Fosse, the naturalist who actively strived to protect declining gorilla populations from poachers, was found hacked to death in her hut. Unfortunately, she did not provide for the needs of the poachers. Any number of volumes could be written on the hardships endured by those who sought change that threatened the status quo.
 
