Chapter Ten

Decision Making and Laws





Decision Making

How are decisions arrived at in a cybernated resource-based society?

To answer this question, we use the scientific method and have computers get direct feedback from the environment. Computers would have electrical sensors extended into all areas of the social complex around the globe. For example, electrical sensors would extend into agricultural regions where computerized systems manage and control the agricultural requirements by monitoring the water table, insects, pests, plant diseases, soil nutrients, and so forth. Decisions are then arrived at using direct feedback from the environment. The result would be a more humane and meaningful civilization that is not based on the opinions or desires of a particular sect or individual.
One can think of this as a global autonomic nervous system. A human body reacts automatically to infection. If one has an infection in the toe there is no committee meeting of cells to inform the brain of the infection. The nervous system directs antibodies to the infected site automatically.
This automatic response of the nervous system parallels the working of a resource-based economy.
The question we have to ask is “What end do we wish the culture to serve?” As the need for money is surpassed and the new mission is the well-being of all people and protection of the environment, the answers become readily available. The result is clean air and water, arable land, nutritious food, efficient transportation, a relevant education continuously updated, good health care, constructive social interaction, and cities functioning to serve these ends and more. This represents a more humane and meaningful approach for shaping civilization that is not based simply on opinion.
As we transition to a fully cybernated process of governing human affairs, newer technologies can be installed that remove human error. These machines would provide information rather than opinion, thus considerably reducing the influence of bias and irrational or purely
 
emotional elements in how affairs are managed. This way people play less and less of a role in decision-making and the society is working towards AI and machine decision-making to manage all resources, serving the common good.


Laws

Laws, at best, are attempts to control a population, and work only sporadically with great expense and hardship. Other common behavior- control methods are patriotism, religion, propaganda, and nationalism. All manmade laws are developed to preserve the established order. But laws never get to the root of problems, and they are continuously violated -- even by those who make them. When laws do not correspond to the nature of the physical environment, they will be violated. With so much economic deprivation and insecurity, even in the most affluent nations, no matter how many laws are enacted the same problems persist. In actuality, it is how the society is structured that is at fault.
Let’s examine these concepts further.
The need for laws is a result of a society being scarcity-oriented. If a resource is abundant no one monitors it. When the necessities of life are abundant, monitoring is unnecessary.
In a resource-based economy social responsibility is not instilled by force, intimidation, or promises of heaven or threats of hell. Protection of the natural environment is not a matter of fines or penalties. Safeguards against abuse are designed into the environment. A simple example of this may be seen in the design of the cities where people have free access to resources without a price. This eliminates theft. Such measures are not a matter of passing and enforcing laws to prevent and punish abuse. Rather, they are a means for designing the flaws out of the social design, thus eliminating the need for many laws.
To eliminate traffic accidents a culture relying on the scientific method would not pass a law limiting speed to 55 mph. They would redesign the transportation systems so that accidents do not occur by using automated trains, monorails, transveyors (horizontal, vertical and radial transveyors), and individual units that have many sensors to diminish the possibilities of accidents.
A society with human concern “designs out” the need for laws and proclamations by making all things available to all people, regardless of race, color, or religious belief. When governments make laws, people are
 
led to believe that these laws are made to protect people's lives. In truth, laws are byproducts of insufficiency.
If we try to control human behavior by enacting laws or signing treaties without changing the physical conditions responsible for aberrant behavior, we are putting a Band-Aid on the issue. Instead of depending on a failed system of punishment or incarceration after the damage has been done, we should shift our attention to the inadequacies of society. These are things like poverty, malnutrition, homelessness, poor role models, a failed education, children lacking direction or interests, violence in the media, stresses in family life, and no positive vision for society to work toward.
A resource-based world economy brings about vast changes in human and interpersonal relations without the necessity of laws. It does this by introducing a set of values relevant to the needs of all people. It views all of the world’s resources and technical information as the common heritage of all people. This is the unifying imperative. If accepted universally, the world will witness an end to the need for armaments, war, drugs, greed, and the other problems brought about by the endless pursuit of money and power.
Society has to understand that all of nature is subservient to natural law. Natural law cannot be violated without serious consequences to the individual or to society. Natural law dominates all living systems. For instance, without water, sun, or nutrients, plants and animals can not survive. Natural law is inviolable. A person who does not receive proper nutrition will not enjoy physical well-being and will soon become ill and die.

Similar Laws Apply to Human Behavior
Human behavior in all areas is just as subject to natural laws and the actions of external forces: it is generated by many interacting variables in one's own environment. This applies to behavior that is socially offensive. It is often influenced either by one's experiential background, nutritional factors in early life, or a number of other interrelated environmental factors.

When we see a dog leading a blind person across the street we tend to think it is a good dog. But when we see a dog bark at a cyclist we call it a bad dog. The dog is neither good nor bad. A dog can be trained to be ferocious or to help the blind. Both animals could be of the same breed,
 
even from the same litter. Their different behavior is due to the differences in upbringing.

To put it another way, imagine an ancient Roman family watching Christians being fed to lions. Someone of today might be horrified and believe the people watching had trouble sleeping that evening. But they most likely had no trouble sleeping at all. Such bloodshed was the cultural sport of the times. Lions and Christians were looked upon with equal disdain.

Or imagine a modern-day fighter pilot trained in warfare and taught a similar disregard for other cultures and beliefs losing sleep over shooting down twenty planes, and burning several inhabited villages. More likely, he will beam as he gets a medal and adorn his aircraft with symbols of his "kills." The pilot reflects his culture just as much as the Roman family does theirs. What we call our ‘conscience’ and ‘morality’ are not determined by an invisible "higher self." They are largely determined by geography, the times, and the individual’s upbringing.

Whether they realize it or not, in the monetary system people are constantly manipulated through the media. People’s most cherished beliefs are influenced by books, motion pictures, television, religions, role models, and the environment they live in. Even their notions of good and evil and their concepts of morality are part of their cultural heritage and experiences. This method of control does not require the use of physical force and is so successful we don’t even recognize or feel the manipulation.

The dominant values of any social system rarely come from the people. Rather, they represent the views of the dominant control group such as the church, the military, the banks, the corporations, the power elite, or any combination thereof. These entities determine the public agenda, the courts, taxes, etc., all of which serve their own interests and perpetuate the illusion that society’s values are determined from the ground up. In addition, governments suppress or explain away deviations that may threaten them.
With the scientific understanding that behavior is subject to the same natural laws that govern other processes, the educational system in the resource-based economy can evolve. It would teach process and analytical skills rather than rote memorization of facts. Dialogue would replace lecture. Understanding semantics is a skill that can greatly improve human communication and assist students in intelligently accessing relevant information. It is not that people will suddenly become
 
better or more ethical, but that the conditions responsible for hostile and egocentric behavior would no longer exist.

If we want children to achieve a positive constructive relationship with one another and become contributing members of society, a way to accomplish this is by designing an environment that produces that desired behavior. For example, when the children are interested in learning how to assemble a small motor vehicle, the design can require four children to lift the car while two others attached the wheels. The rest of the car is assembled in a similar manner, needing the help and cooperation of everyone to complete the vehicle for use. This enlightened form of education helps to understand the advantages of cooperation.
Exercise would not be mandatory or monotonous, and it wouldn’t involve adversarial competition. It would be incorporated into the learning experience. For example, a craft shop the children enjoy using is located on a hilltop in the middle of a lake. To get there the children have to row a boat, and then climb the hilltop. This not only provides exercise, but also a sense of achievement, which helps their mental health and increases incentive.
One of the greatest limiting factors in human systems is our inability to grasp the significance of underlying forces and the extent to which environment shapes our thinking, values, and/or behavior. When we speak of environment, we mean all of the interacting variables, which are the prime contributors to our mindset.
